Three, two, one.
Tape interview, Donald Ouellette interviewing
Hoyt Haddock, December 23, 1982, Washington, DC.
Mr. Haddock, could you please give me some general
biographical background as to your date of birth?
Well, I was born May 5, 1907.
on a farm about four miles from Boyd, Texas. That's
in Wise County. Decatur is the county seat.
And my father was a sharecropper, and we lived on
the farm until
Oh, I guess,
as I remember, we moved from a farm to Decatur and
lived in Decatur a while. Then we moved from
Decatur to Greenwood, back on another farm, and
then from Greenwood to Lubbock, Lubbock back to
Fort Worth, where I really grew up. I lived in Fort
Worth until I left there in 1927 to go to Galveston
to take a ship. In Fort Worth I went to, well, may as
well tell you about the schooling I didn't have. I
finished grade school and I think it was in the
tenth grade of high school when I quit high school
for economic reasons. Basically, I didn't have
shoes to wear or clothes to wear to school.
I quit, quit there, quit school and took a job at
Armour and Company in their fancy meat cooler. I
was a,
my job was called box boy. I put boxes together and
then put lids on them when they would fill them up
with the fancy meats, fancy meats being tongues
and livers and hearts and this sort of thing, the
various organs.
That job petered out because of the economic
conditions then prevalent in the area. and I got a
job at Montgomery Wards.
There I was a stockman for several divisions
before I left there. Again, I was laid off because
of economic conditions. This was about in the
mid-20s,
and I guess The economic conditions in Texas were
worse than anywhere in the country at the time. I
can recall my father going literally for two years
without a day's work. He was a cabinetmaker.
He also did some contracting and carpenter work.
He'd do anything he could get to do. Things were
that bad in Texas at that time.
As I recall, this was about 1922 or 23 when he was out
of work for so long. So we've seen some hard times on
the farm and off the farm. The last farm that we were
on was the one in Greenwood. We had 100 acres, and
practically the whole 100 acres were put in
cotton. and I guess for the first time the family
got out of debt on that cotton because it was during
a war time, World War I, and cotton prices went up
and did pretty good on it.
In Fort Worth, after getting laid off from
Brantley, from
Montgomery
Wards. I had gotten interested in radio and
decided I wanted to be a radio operator on a ship. So
I went to Bratley Drawn, which was a commercial
school, private school, and took radio for the
purpose of getting my commercial radio officers,
radio operators license, it was called at that
time, And after having gotten that, I went to
Galveston and shipped out. My first ship was in
December the 27th.
I think 1927. I'm not sure of that date. I'll have to
check that date. I have it at home. And I relieved
someone who wanted to be home for Christmas. And I
stayed on the Tilly Likes until I
really don't know how long. But the company wanted
me to take the West Comac. This was a government
ship operated by Likes Brothers, shipping board
that was called at that time, the government
agency. And I took that ship west come back and
spent a little time on her. And I don't remember
whether I got off because the ship laid up or for
what reason now. But I went from there to the ER camp
of the Sinclair Navigation Company, Sinclair
Refining.
And from that ship I came ashore as a radio operator
at WPA, Port Arthur, Texas. It's a station that was
originally built by the Gulf Refining Company but
later taken over by the Radio Marine Corporation
of America as a result of a contract they made with
the Gulf to furnish their radio equipment and
service it and so forth.
And I was there until Shipping really went bad.
About 50% of the ships got tied up, and the station
had to cut back on its
personnel. And I shipped out again on a Gulf tanker
for a few months. I don't remember how long. And
then Port Arthur wanted me back, and I came back to
Port Arthur. And I stayed there until 1933. In
1930,
I
had been soliciting
members, getting radio officers to join the
American Radio Telegraphist Association, of
which I became a member. This was a union of radio
operators. What was it? Did it have a national
affiliation? No affiliation. American Radio
Telegraphist Association.
And
they asked me to run for president, and I told them
that I would run for president, provided the they
would let me stay in Port Arthur because I didn't
want to act as, didn't want an active presidency in
the Union.
And I didn't want to go to New York.
So, 1931,
there was an election. I was elected president.
They counted the ballots at night and sent me a
telegram, which I got the next morning. long
telegram telling me that the, if I wanted a union,
I'd better come to New York and take over because
the then secretary treasurer had not been in the
office in six or seven weeks and was frequently
seen drunk in the gutter in New York. And they
didn't think that he would ever be able to keep the
union together. So I, my wife and I packed our stuff
and we went to, got in our little Ford and drove up to
New York. And I became an active unionist at that
time. I became president, in fact. And
interesting enough, when I got to New York, there
were 31 paid up members of the union.
And I stayed with the Union until 1937
and I'm told the membership at least a year ahead of
that that I did not want to run again for
presidency. That I wanted to
stay in the industry and I wanted to do other
things.
Actually, I had set a timetable on what I wanted to
do. I had wanted to go to sea for two years. Then I had
wanted to come ashore for three or four years as an
operator in a coastal station. Incidentally,
while I was at Port Arthur, I changed from an
operator to maintenance and repair and
installation. In other words, installing radio
equipment electronic equipment on ships,
servicing it, maintaining it. And after three or
four years in that work, I wanted to become part of
the Federal Communications Commission in
Washington. It wasn't the Federal
Communications Commission then, it was the radio
division of the Department of Commerce. Anyway,
that was the steps that I had set out for myself to
take. Anyway, the union changed all of that. I had
not planned to be a trade unionist. It wasn't in my
schedule at all. It was just one of these quirks in
life that come along.
Anyway, in New York,
I became, of course, president of the American
Radio-Telegraph Association, and that led into,
of course, my association with the National
Maritime Union.
In 1936, the, I think this was 36, I'm not sure of
these dates, you'll have to check these dates
against material which you have. These records
will show the dates.
The famous California strike and them coming back
to New York and trying to set up a viable trade
union, which of course was fought hand in tooth by
the then
International Seaman's Union's hierarchy,
which were basically in cahoots with the
steamship companies and not interested really in
the membership. The only thing they were
interested in is controlling the membership so
that they could make money. Did you ever have any
dealings with the presidents of the different
divisions? I had dealings with all of them. We
tried, of course, to get the cooperation of all of
the maritime unions. And we could get that
cooperation as long as it was coming from us to
them. But the other way, we never got it from any of
them, including the Longshoremen's Association
at that time. Joe Ryan was head of the
Longshoremen's Association. I can remember the
first strike we had.
United States lines cut the wages of the radio
operators on their ships
a very large sum. I don't remember what the figures
were, but there was a very large cut in the wages of
the radio operators.
This was when? This would have been 1934
or 35.
I'm not sure when.
If you want those dates, you will have to try the
American Radio Association office in New York for
them because they would have all the back issues of
the publications that we put out at that time.
It became apparent to me that we were probably
going to have to strike that company because we
could not get a meeting with any of the officials of
the United States lines.
So I sent out an invitation, a written invitation
to all of the unions that I had any association with
or thought should be involved in this because it
was going to affect them. for a meeting called at
our then headquarters, which was 20 Irving Place
in New York.
We addressed a letter to all of the divisions of the
International Seaman's Union. They had a
stewards department, a deck department, and an
engine department.
Then there was a master mates and pilots, marine
engineers,
the ILA, of course, International
Longshoremen's Association, and there was a
Marine Workers Industrial Union, which was
commie-controlled. I did not know that at the
time, but anyway, they were commie-controlled,
and no They didn't try to maintain it a secret. They
made it very plain the officers were communists.
They told me outright they were communists.
Anyway, I did invite them also because they were
one of the unions in the maritime field. And
strange as it may seem, although I had frequent
meetings with the ISU,
officials, and we were supposed to be
cooperating, the only union that showed up
willing to help us was this Marine Workers
Industrial Union. So, I laid out what I was, what I
thought we ought to do, and they had some ideas on
what should be done. And anyway, we, we called a
strike, and they were the only ones that really
gave us any help in that strike.
The next, I guess the next really important thing
in the marine field was then the California and it
coming back to New York and them trying to set up a
headquarters and it turned out that they could not
rent a place for headquarters because everyone
was putting in a plug against them. If they found
that they were about to rent some place, the
company would call, call the
Steamship industry people would call up, and the
old SIU unions and the ILA would call up the people
who owned the place and tell them not to rent to that
bunch of communists. It turned out that I went and
rented a place for them in the name of the ARA and got
phones in. It was American Radio Telegraph
Association. at that time and got telephones for
them, which we paid for, and
set up a headquarters for the strikers, the
seamen. Why would your union want to get involved
with these striking factions? Because it was
perfectly plain to me that if we were going to have a
union that meant anything, we were going to have to
worked with seamen who were interested in better
conditions for the seafaring people. Why do you
think at this time, late 35, early 36, why all of a
sudden were seamen getting involved in the unions
again since the unions per se hadn't been strong
since after the 1921 maritime strike? Why all of a
sudden 1935, 36?
Why did a large amount of seamen become
politically active and union active? Well, I
think it was basically because this
was really sort of an age of social conscience of
people. Not only seamen, but a lot of people.
became more social conscious, more conscious of
the needs of the working people.
There was a movement of the whole population,
really.
You will recall that in that time period, The whole
movement of liberals in the country
started to try to help working people. We had, of
course, all of the
government laws that were designed to help
working people. The National Labor Relations Act
was an outgrowth of this whole thing. There was a
lot of labor legislation at that time. And I think
basically it was just,
I can't pin it down to any one thing. I just think
there was a general awareness of the need of change
amongst the population really. Now what caused
it, I don't know. You can say it was the man up there
or anything. I don't know what it was. I
do know that something was guiding me because I was
going where I had not planned to go at all. So
whether it was the man up there or what, I really
don't know. Because my schedule had not called for
me to be active in trade union work.
my sole interest in getting involved in it in Port
Arthur was to try to help to elevate the horrible
conditions that did exist
and of course when I got to New York to continue to
work to eliminate those horrible conditions
and getting affiliated with the then, I guess you
would call it, rebel group. It was clear to me that
if there was going to be any success in the trade
union movement, it would have to be through the
rebel group. It was not coming from the corrupt,
what I considered.
Then
I guess I shouldn't use the word corrupt because I
can't prove that any of these people took money
from anyone.
I guess I had better simply say that to me they did
not display a
concern for the people that they were elected to
represent.
Why didn't your union, the ARTA, ever try to
affiliate with the AFL? We did. We did try to
affiliate, and they would not let us affiliate.
They insisted that we had to become part of the...
Oh, what was the name of it? Communication
workers.
I can't think of the name of the union. Again, I
think there, I'm not sure that the union is still in
existence, but you would have to get the name of it
from
the AFL-CIO. I just don't remember the name of the
old communication workers. It's not the, not the
communication workers of America. It's the old
union that was affiliated with the AFL-CIO. The
communication workers of America came through
the CIO. So the AFL didn't want a maritime-based
radio operators union. They wanted to be
affiliated with a land-based. They insisted on
that because that union had the charter for
communication workers. So they felt there'd be a
jurisdictional boundary? Oh, that union
insisted that the AFLs not give a charter to us.
Retrogressing a bit back to the Marine Workers
Industrial Union. Right. Why do you think it
failed and the old ISU continued to survive from 34
on?
Basically, I think it failed because of its
communist affiliation. I think that's the basic
reason because basically,
well basically Americans were not oriented
towards dictatorships.
While the communists at that time of course
preached that it was a dictatorship of the
proletariat, Anyone with very much sense had to
soon learn that it was not a dictatorship of the
proletariat, it was a dictatorship of the
Communist Party. And that the Communist Party, no
totalitarian
government can exist without having control over
the workers. Workers have to be slaves to the party
in control or they can't maintain it. And of
course, the building of their armies and their
power to maintain that control is power to control
the working force. That's basically the only way
that they can stay in existence.
Moving back to the time when the California
returned to New York after the strike in Pedro,
who began to support the rebel faction besides
your union? Basically the Communists really were
the only outward support there was. There was
plenty of liberal support, liberals in the New
York area, As a matter of fact, a lot of money was
raised as a result of liberal help, people not
affiliated with the communists who were liberals
and recognized the need for changing the
conditions which exist. For example, I can
remember a wife of one of the presidents of one of
the steamship companies giving a very large sum of
money to this movement at that time to help the
seamen.
And that was typical, you know, amongst a lot of
fairly well-to-do liberal people who wanted to
help.
But I really think that the Communists were not
successful because
The people recognized that their allegiance was
to the Communist Party, and the Communist Party
was, at that time, the Communist Party of Russia.
Everything flowed back there. The orders came
down from there, and the orders went back there.
And I know that as far as Joe and I were concerned,
Joe Curran, We recognized that the Communists
were only interested in building the unions for
the purpose of building a power base for
themselves. They were really not interested in
improving the conditions except for that
purpose, to build a power base. How early do you
think Curran was aware of this, or became aware of
this? I would say from the first. From the moment he
arrived in New York? or even earlier than that?
Well, I know that he and I started discussing this
when immediately we got
acquainted with each other. When was the first
time that you met Joe Curran? I think the first time
I met Joe Curran was in an apartment, in his
apartment, in New York. I think it was on 23rd,
pardon me, 23rd Street. I went to a meeting there
that I was invited to. I guess there were five or six
of us in that meeting. And I think that's the first
time I met Joe, I'm not sure. Before or after the
California incident? Well this was after. I
didn't know Joe. You didn't know him before? No.
This was after the California came back to New York
and of course they were all dumped on the street and
they started striking the ships. And the men
started piling off the ships.
The seamen needed someone to give them
leadership, and Joe started providing that
leadership. Did Joe actively seek out this
position as leader, or did it just happen that way?
It happened with Joe the same way it happened with
me. He had no idea of becoming an active president
of a union. This was the farthest from his
thoughts. All he wanted to do was to be a good member
of Reunion and follow his calling as a seaman. So
you felt then, in 36, he just wanted to help reform
the ISU and then go back to sea? No. I think once that
he got in the leadership position that he wanted to
go back to sea. I think that he wanted to stay in that
position, that he wanted to continue that.
I didn't want to go back to sea to begin with. I had
no, two years was all I wanted to spend at sea,
except as a first-class passenger.
The life of a seaman did not fit my personality at
all. It's too restrictive. You're a prisoner
aboard that ship all the time you're at sea. You
have no,
can't think of the right word, you have no
intercourse with the political economic and
social life of the nation.
You
see the same people at breakfast, dinner, and
supper, and any recreation that you can
get started are with the same people.
And if there happen to be people on that ship who are
not socially inclined, or what I would call for
simplification, troublemakers, you have to see
them every day in and out. You cannot pick your
friends. Your friends are picked for you. And it is
just not a
life that fits my personality.
There's a lot to be said for going to sea for someone
who wants to
spend a lot of time reading and educating himself,
and I took advantage of that while I was at sea. I
found that that was the best outlet for me because I
was not a gambler. I did not play cards. I did not
drink. And playing cards or checkers or something
like that was about the only recreation at that
time that existed on the ship.
But it is a good place to get yourself some
self-education. And goodness knows I needed
plenty of it. And I did take advantage of it. I
continued my mathematics. It so happens that I was
particularly good in mathematics when I got into
high school. And that's one of the things that I did
continue. Incidentally, we were graded at that
time from 1 to 100, you know. And in plane geometry,
I believe it was plane geometry, I'm sure it was, we
had a teacher. And she gave us all a problem and
said, now that anyone who can work that problem, I
will give seven points extra on their report card.
Well, I had been getting 99 on my report card all
along, so
I wanted to see what happened. So I worked the
problem and brought it in, and I got the usual 99. So
I went to her and she said, well, Hoyt, you know that
no one is perfect, and that's why I always give a 99
to anyone who passes all the tests and does the work
in class. as you have been doing it. So if I give 106,
which you would be entitled to, that means you're
better than perfect, and that isn't so. I said,
well, that may not be so, but you promised me seven
points, and I want them. And if I don't get them, I'm
going to the principal. She said, well, I said, I
understand your position. And I'm not going to
give them to you, and you're perfectly free to go to
the principal. So I went to the principal. The
principal ordered her to give me the seven points.
Stupid, but that's the way it happened anyway. But
I was particularly interested in that, and I did
continue on it. And I was not good in history in
school simply because I didn't understand the
importance of it. But when I got to C, I did
understand the importance of it, and I started
studying history. Another subject I was not good
in in school was English. Here again, I did not
understand the importance of learning all of the
technique involved in English, for example.
Not having understood it, I wasn't good in it.
That's one of the things I did learn in the little
time in high school I was there, was to be good in any
subject you have to understand the reason for
being good in it, the importance of it. And this
mathematics teacher that I had, and also the head
of mathematics in that school, used the students
who were particularly good in it to help other
students. And I learned right away that it was a
very simple approach to the situation. You had to
learn the basics of all these subjects in order to
understand the importance of them, or to even work
the problems. For example, in algebra, as you
know, there are certain basic rules that you must
learn. These are facts which you learn as a basis of
solving the problem. The same thing goes on all
through any part of mathematics starting with
addition, subtraction, division,
multiplication, all of them, all the way up. And
basically all that I had to do was to get the people
that were assigned to me to help to go back and
memorize those things you had to memorize. And
that's another thing that I wish I had done in
school was realize the importance of memory. And I
didn't realize the importance of memory until I
got into high school, really. The result has been
that my memory has always been bad and still is.
Going back to 36 and shortly after the California
dock, who do you think was responsible for
grooming Joe Kern, turning him in from an A.B. to a
union leader, as far as speaking abilities? I
think the Communist Party was. Any persons in
particular that you... Well, I remember Roy
Hudson, who was very active during all of this. At
that time, he was the head man in the Marine end of
the Communist Party. He was head of the Marine
Workers Industrial Union, and I guess that made
him the head. I don't know whether he became head of
Marine Workers Industrial Union because he was a
communist, or whether he became a communist
because he was there. I don't know what happened.
But he was at the time the head man, and of course he
was interested in trying to build the strength of
the Communist Party in the marine industry. In
your opinion, did the Communists seek out Joe
Curran or vice versa? They sought out Joe Curran.
Just like they sought out me when they learned that
I was in New York. They sought me out and tried to
influence me on everything that I did. And they
tried to influence Joe on everything that he did.
And it was up to Joe and it was up to me to listen to
their pitch and make a decision as to what part of it
you could use and what part of it you couldn't use.
When these rebels went out on strike, did you have
your union members obey their picket lines? This
is in the spring strike of 36. I
don't think we did. I think they told us to stay
aboard the ships. I think this is a decision we made
for the radio operators to stay aboard the ship.
And not actively participate in the strike or
actively back? That's right. In other words, if
the ship And
if the ship sailed, we were to sail with it. This
way, we always had communication. Communication
was as important then as it is now. And I'm sure that
that was what we decided to do, although I don't
remember the details or the discussions and so
forth that led up to this, because we actually went
off the ships with the seamen to begin with. and
then decided that this was the wrong tactic for the
radio operator, that one man was not going to
contribute anything to the ship, to being ashore
if the ship was going to sail. That man was more
important aboard the ship, and it turned out that
we were the most important man aboard the ship as
far as the strike was concerned. So then your union
members kind of passively supported Kieran and
his followers? We don't more than passively
supported it. We were, we supported him with
finances. I assigned our vice president to the, to
the group full-time. That's all he did. And do you
remember this gentleman's name? Yeah, his name
was Roy Pyle.
Why do you think that the spring strike of 36
failed? Or do you think it failed? I don't think it
failed. No, I don't think at all it failed. It built
up the understanding of the need for strong union
in the industry,
made everyone aware of what the conditions were.
and made the seamen aware that if those conditions
were ever going to be changed, there had to be a
union, which they controlled, the seamen
themselves. How did the Kieran's group get such a
large media following? Well, the media is always
interested in any news that there is. And there
were a lot of liberals associated with the
newspapers. Haywood Broon, did he support you at
this time? He surely did. Do you think he might have
been able to give Seaman more newspaper space than
they might have under, say, another personality?
No, Haywood Broon really didn't give the Seaman
any newspaper space any more than he would give
anyone else. He wrote some stuff about the
situation when it was appropriate for him to do so,
but he really didn't change his style in any way.
Haywood Bruin...
Did he ever meet with Karen or anything? Oh yes,
yes. He met with every leader of every union in the
trade union movement. And he would give his
personal help wherever he could. So he advised
Karen at times? No, I don't think he ever advised
anyone. I don't think he had that. His role was
advising. His role was speaking to the people, to
the mass group. One of my jobs was to keep Haywood
Bruin in a condition so he could speak to the
people, to stay with him when he was invited to
speak at meetings, not just of Seaman, but of other
trade unions. This was true with the transport
workers in New York. It was true of the ILGWU in New
York. He spoke at practically every meeting that
there was in New York. He made himself available to
speak at these meetings. And
I would say about at least 75% of the time, one of the
things that I had to do really was...